To tie the figure eight knot, grab the end of the rope in one hand, then extend your arm and measure out a length from your fist to your opposite shoulder.
Hold up that bite and twist it one full rotation so that the standing part of the rope crosses over the working side, then comes around again to its original position.
Now pass the end of the rope back through the loop.
Next, pass the end of the rope through both the tie-in points on your harness and pull the knot in close to you.
Now feed the rope back through the knot, tracing the original as you go.
You want the working end to run completely parallel to the standing part of the original knot.
Once you've worked the end all the way through, dress the knot by making sure the strands are neat and parallel, then tighten the knot by pulling each strand tight individually.
Make sure you have at least six inches of tail, and you can check the knot by counting five sets of parallel lines.
You'll use the figure eight all the time because it's the most common way to tie the rope into your harness.
To learn more, check out these videos, or click here to find an REI class near you.